---
language: Greek
pos: adjective
strongs: 499
gloss:
  - a thing formed after some pattern
  - a thing resembling another
  - its counterpart
lexicon: [ἀντίτυπος]
root: ΑΝΤΙ, ΤΥΠΟΣ, ΤΥΠΤΩ
---

1. Hebrews 9:24
1. 1 Peter 3:21

<blockquote>
The word **αντιτυπος** occurs twice in the New Testament. It means “a blow against a blow, an echo, reflection, correspondence of stamp to die.” In 1 Peter 3:21 we read: “which also now saves you antitypically, even baptism.” The salvation of Noah through faith and obedience becomes a type for this apostolic writer of the greater salvation which is to come. The waters of the flood, which bore in safety the ark, are the Old Testament type of the waters of Christian baptism, the New Testament antitype. This is the usually accepted order or progression of the Biblical type and antitype. But in Hebrews 9:24 it seems at first as though the order of type and antitype were reversed. It reads: “For Christ has not entered into a holy place made with hands, [p. 91] antitypical of the true one.” Here the heavenly tabernacle seems to be the type, and the model on earth is the antitype. The author evidently is not thinking of the Old Testament tabernacle as being fulfilled in the New Testament, i.e., in Christ or the work of Christ, but rather as an earthly replica of a heavenly tabernacle. This view is Biblically justifiable in the light of the words of Exodus 25:40, which are actually quoted in Hebrews 8:5. Therefore both uses of αντιτυπος, which at first appear contradictory, are entirely possible from the Biblical point of view.
</blockquote>
"Biblical Typology", Charles T. Fritsch, Typological Interpretation in the New Testament, *Bibliotheca Sacra 104* (1947) pp. 87-100. http://www.bible-researcher.com/fritsch.html
