---
language: Greek
pos: adjective
strongs: 1967
gloss:
  - coming
  - next
lexicon: [ἐπιούσιος]
root: ΕΠΙ, ΕΠΕΙΜΙ|
---

## Usage
1. Luke 11:3
1. Matthew 6:11

## Debate
This is an incredibly difficult word to pin down.  There are no credible instances of it outside of the two instances we have in the gospels.  Origen states that the word was not used much in his day (De Oratorio 27). The Syriac Peshitta reads "the bread of our necessity" by the earlier Curetonian Syriac reads "continual" <ref>Thayer's Lexicon, ἐπιούσιος</ref> There are three possible interpretations and we have decided to favor the last.

### "Necessary"
Beza, Kuinoel, Tholuck, Ewald, Bleek, Keim, and Cremer follow Origen, Jerome, Theopylact and Euthymius Zigabenus in supposing the word to be derived from επι + ουσια, after the pattern of exousia and ΕΝΟΥΣΙΟΣ.

Counter to this argument is the fact that ousia occurs very rarely and always in philosophical contexts (Aristotle's *De Partibus Animalium* I.1. and Plato's *Theaetetus* p.185 are the main examples) where it means *essence* or *substance*.

### "Present"
Leo Meyer, Kamphausen, Weiss and Delitzsch think this word comes from epi + εἰμί, supposing Christ to have said in Aramaic

לַחְכָא רְחֻקָנָא

(cp Proverbs 30:8).  Unfortunately, while some word made of epi + root do retain the ending iota, epi + εἰμί and all it's derivative elite the letter.

### "Tomorrow"
Grotius, Scaliger, Wetstein, Fischer, Valckenaer, Fritzsche, Winer, Bretschneider, Wahl and Meyer favor the etymology epi + εἶμι (to go) = ΕΠΕΙΜΙ.  This would mean "give us the bread for the coming *day*" and complement well the σήμερον in Matthew, where Christ goes on in 6:34 to say something similar.



<references/>
