---
language: Greek
pos: noun
strongs: 3466
gloss:
  - mystery
lexicon: [μυστήριον]
root: ΜΥΕΩ
gender: Neuter|
---

## Definition
In the ﻿NT﻿, a "mystery" is a truth not previously known, and a truth which human intellect could never discover, but which has now been made known by divine revelation.

In Paul's day, μυστήριον was a technical term utilized by the "mystery religions" which referred to a secret concealed by strange customs and ceremonies and confided only to those initiated into the "mystery cult".   "Musterion" embraced ideas such as "a secret rite," "secret teaching," and "a divine mystery which is beyond human comprehension." The "mystery-religions" had their secrets and signs just as seen in modern secret societies. Those initiated into these pagan cults, knew these secret signs. A mystery, then - in the context of the Greek Mystery Religions - was a secret rite which was administered to the person being initiated.

'Mystery' in modern usage is similar to this ancient use, because it typically means a secret for which no answer can be found (e.g. a "mystery novel"). In contrast, Scripture uses μυστήριον to indicate truth which was previously unknown but which now has been made known through revelation mediated by God.

μυστήριον in the Bible means those truths which are part of God's plan and can only be understood as He reveals them by His Spirit. "Musterion" refers to previously hidden truth, which when revealed, is **understood** by the believer. Stated another way, μυστήριον is "a secret purpose of God which when uncovered is understood by the Spirit-taught believer." It refers to a truth which - without special revelation - would have been unknown and thus is commonly used with words denoting revelation or knowledge (e.g., "to know the mysteries", (Matthew 13:11), "revelation of the mystery", (Romans 16:25) and "made known...the mystery", Ephesians 3:3)

Vincent defines μυστήριον as that

<blockquote>which was kept hidden from the world until revealed at the appointed time, and which is a secret to ordinary eyes, but is made known by divine revelation. (Vincent, M. R. Word studies in the New Testament. Vol. 4, Page 234-235).</blockquote>

MacArthur adds that

<blockquote>μυστήριον does not carry the connotation that word has in modern English, as used, for example, of a mystery novel. In the New Testament it refers to something hidden in former times but now made known. Specifically, it refers to a part of God's truth that was not revealed, or was only partially revealed, in the Old Testament. (MacArthur, J: Romans 9-16.)</blockquote>

McGee explains that...

<blockquote>A mystery is something which had not been revealed in the Old Testament but is now revealed in the New Testament. It is something which you cannot learn by the eye-gate or the ear-gate. Nor has it entered into the heart of man—that is, it is not something man would have thought of. It is a fact which must be revealed by God. (McGee, J V: Thru the Bible Commentary)</blockquote>

Unger says that

<blockquote>The NT use of the term mystery has reference to some operation or plan of God hitherto unrevealed. It does not carry the idea of a secret to be withheld, but of one to be published...The term mystery, moreover, comprehends not only a previously hidden truth, presently divulged, but one that contains a supernatural element that still remains in spite of the revelation (Unger, M. F., Harrison, R. K., Vos, H. F., Barber, C. J., & Unger, M. F. The New Unger's Bible Dictionary. Chicago: Moody Press)</blockquote>

BDAG explains that μυστήριον is...

<blockquote>the unmanifested or private counsel of God, (God's) secret, the secret thoughts, plans, and dispensations of God which are hidden from human reason, as well as from all other comprehension below the divine level, and await either fulfillment or revelation to those for whom they are intended.</blockquote>

Barclay adds that μυστήριον

<blockquote>"means something whose meaning is hidden from those who have not been initiated, but crystal clear to those who have. It would describe a ceremony carried out in some society whose meaning was quite clear to the members of the society, but unintelligible to the outsider...in other words "In Greek a μυστήριον is not necessarily something abstruse; it is something quite unintelligible to the uninitiated but crystal clear to the initiated."
- Barclay, W: The Daily Study Bible Series
</blockquote>

The secret counsels of God which remains hidden from the ungodly (to them they are a true "mystery" as the word is commonly used in English) but when these truths are revealed to the godly, they are understood by them. The mystery is not in the fact that the truths are difficult to interpret, but that they are impossible to interpret until their meaning is *revealed* at which time the truth becomes plain.

Jesus explained to His disciples that they had been initiated into these secret things declaring

{{QV|Mark|4|11|12}}

When Jesus talks of the mystery of the Kingdom, it does not mean that the Kingdom is remote and hard to understand, but it does mean that this truth is quite unintelligible to the man or woman who has not believed in Him.

Μυστήριον has its roots in the Old Testament and is found eight times in Daniel 2 in the Greek translation (Septuagint). The Hebrew equivalent occurs in the Dead Sea Scrolls, in all-Hebrew versions of Danikel. Gnostic teachers talked a lot about 'mysteries' so Paul takes their "special" word and presents his message regarding the Gentiles. Most people think of mystery as something eerie and unknown but this was not the way Paul uses the word, some 21 times in the NT.

### Kinds of Mystery

Mysteries in the Scripture fall into two categories. Some have already been revealed, and among these are the incarnation of Christ and the salvation of sinners. Others are yet to be seen, such as the general resurrection, the coming Antichrist, and the evil of the last day. It is comforting to realize that all the mysteries which bear on our salvation are already revealed to readers of Scripture.

Μυστήριον is a divine secret or truth which is unknowable apart from divine revelation and which has now been revealed in Christ and the surrounding context stresses the fact that the mystery was hidden from pre-cross times,﻿ but now has been manifested to the saints of the church age.

{| class="wikitable"
|+ Summary of NT Mysteries
|-
! The Mystery of the Incarnate God
| {{LV|Colossians|2|2|3}},9
|-
! The Mystery of Iniquity
| 2 Thessalonians 2:7
|-
! The Mystery of the Rapture
| {{LV|1 Corinthians|15|51|52}}
|-
! The Mystery of Babylon
| Revelation 17:5,7
|-
! The Mystery of the Church
| {{LV|Ephesians|1|9|10}}; {{LV/2|Ephesians|3|3|6}},Ephesians 3:9a; 6:19
|-
! The Mystery of the Bride
| {{LV|Ephesians|5|23|32}}
|-
! The Mystery of Israel's Unbelief
| Romans 11:25
|}

So here we see a clear contrast between the ordinary use of mystery implying knowledge withheld, but in Scripture indicating truth revealed. The terms often found associated with mystery are "made known," "manifested," "revealed," "preached," 'understand," "dispensation."

In the present passage it is used of the union of redeemed men with God in Christ, forming the church which is Christ's body, similar to the meaning in Ephesians 5:32. In Ephesians the prominent thought is the union of the saints in Christ ({{LV|Ephesians|3|2|3}},4,5,6) while in Colossians the thought is the indwelling of Christ in the saints. And yet in both epistles the figure is that of the body of which Christ is the Head.

So here Paul revealed a "sacred secret", previously unknown "which is Christ in you, the hope of glory." Paul wanted the Gentiles to know that they too could have Christ in them. He teaches the parallel thought in Ephesians 2:11 and following. This is the great mystery, the greatest truth taught in the Bible, and yet it is the most seriously missing element in many churches today. Most Christians in our churches understand and believe that Christ died for their sins but most fail to go beyond this basic truth. Relatively few go on to grasp the fact that Jesus died for them that He might live in and through them, the so called "exchanged life" or "Christ life". Many fall sadly short of grasping that it is Christ's life in them that provides the power to live the Christian life, bring about real change in one's behavior and lifestyle and provide the ability to resist temptation. It is not enough to know that Christ died in order that we might go to heaven. We are also to know, understand, and practice Christ "Who is our life" living in us now! (Colossians 3:4) Have you begun to discover this "mystery"? To attempt to obey the many commands in Colossians 3 and 4 without an understanding and appropriation of one's Life Source can lead to frustration and failure in the Christian life, which God desires for you to live abundantly. 

## Usage
### NT
The Synoptic Gospel writers each use the word only once, on the lips of Jesus.  The texts are parallel, each describing the same pericope.
1. Matthew 13:11 - APN
1. Mark 4:11 - NSN
1. Luke 8:10 - APN
#### Pauline (21)
The two Romans' usages occur in similar places in the structure.  Chapter 11 is the close the first "half" of the book and chapter 16 closes the seconds "half" (as well as the whole book).
1. Romans 11:25 - ASN - the mystery of the hardening of Israel, for the salvation of Gentiles
1. Romans 16:25 - GSN - the revelation of the mystery of salvation

1. 1 Corinthians 2:1 - ASN - in contrast to speech and wisdom
1. 1 Corinthians 2:7 - DSN - God's wisdom in a mystery.  It had been hidden (but no longer)
1. 1 Corinthians 4:1 - GPN - ministers are stewards of God's mysteries
1. 1 Corinthians 13:2 - APN - mysteries are known, like knowledge
1. 1 Corinthians 14:2 - APN - Tongues are mysteries (before they are interpreted)
1. 1 Corinthians 15:51 - APN - a mystery: since he is saying it, it is not still a secret!

1. Ephesians 1:9 - ASN - has been made known
1. Ephesians 3:3 - ASN - made known by revelation
1. Ephesians 3:4 - DSN - Paul's understanding in the mystery of Christ
1. Ephesians 3:9 - GSN - has been hidden (but is now revealed)
1. Ephesians 5:32 - NSN - marriage has been a mystery, but now we know it is Christ and the Church
1. Ephesians 6:19 - ASN - make known the mystery of the gospel

1. Colossians 1:26 - ASN - it was hidden but is now known to the saints
1. Colossians 1:27 - GSN - God has made known the riches of His glory of this mystery
1. Colossians 2:2 - GSN - the über-knowledge of the mystery of God
1. Colossians 4:3 - GSN - Paul is in prison for the speaking the mystery of Christ

1. 2 Thessalonians 2:7 - NSN - the mystery of lawlessness.  God restrains but he will make known

1. 1 Timothy 3:9 - ASN - holding (grasping, knowing) the mystery of faith
1. 1 Timothy 3:16 - NSN - the mystery of faith: God was revealed in the flesh

#### Johaninne
1. Revelation 1:20 - NSN - the mystery of 7 stars & 7 lamp stands ... explained.
1. Revelation 10:7 - NSN - the mystery of God will be ended
1. Revelation 17:5 - NSN - name of the harlot-beast
1. Revelation 17:7 - ASN - "I tell you the mystery"

### LXX
In Daniel 2 
1. 18 - GSN - concerning this mystery
1. 19 - NSN - the mystery was revealed
1. 27 - ASN - the mystery the king has seen
1. 28 - APN - God in heaven reveals mysteries
1. 29 - APN - He who reveals mysteries (i.e. God)
1. 30 - NSN - this mystery has been revealed
1. 47 - APN - (God is) the only revealer of secret mysteries; **second** - ASN - you were able to reveal this mystery
1. and also 4:9 - NSN - no mystery is impossible for you (Daniel).
In each and every case, it is the sole word used to translate רָז, a masculine, Aramaic noun meaning 'secret', 'mystery' or 'hidden thing'.  In modern Farsi, it still means 'mystery'.

### Apocrypha
1. Tobit 12 vv.7,11 - ASN, ASN - a mystery was hidden, then revealed by God
1. Judith 2 v.2 - ASN
