---
language: Greek
pos: article
strongs: 3588
gloss:
  - the
  - he
  - she
lexicon: [ὁ]
hebrew: ה
---

**definite article/demonstrative pronoun **

Understanding the **Definite Article** is essential for biblical exegesis, and our summary here is especially shortened, believe it or not!

{{Greek Adjective
| ὁ   | ἡ   | τό
| τοῦ | τῆς | τοῦ
| τῷ  | τῇ  | τῷ
| τόν | τήν | τό
| οἱ  | αἱ   | τά
| τῶν | τῶν | τῶν
| τοῖς | ταῖς | τοῖς
| τούς | τάς | τά
}}

{{clear}}

## As a Pronoun ([partially] Independent Use)
The article is not a true pronoun in Koine Greek, even though it derived from the demonstrative. But in many instances it can function semantically in the place of a pronoun.

### Personal Pronoun
:***he, she, it***
The article is often used in the place of a *third* person personal pronoun in the nominative case. It is only used in this way with the μὲν...δὲ construction or with δε alone (Thus, ὁ μὲν ... ὁ δὲ, or simply ὁ δὲ)
  John 4:32 **ὁ** δὲ εἶπεν αὐτοῖς
  But **he** said to them

### Relative Pronoun
:***who, which***
Sometimes the article is equivalent to a relative pronoun in *force*. This is especially true when it is repeated after a noun before a phrase (e.g., a genitive phrase).
 1 Corinthians 1:18 ο λογος γαρ **ο** του σταυρου
 the word **that is** of the cross

 Luke 7:32 ομοιοι εισιν παιδιοις **τοις** εν αγορα καθημενοις
 They are like children **who** [are] sitting in the marketplace.

### Possessive Pronoun
:***his, her***
The article is sometimes used in contexts in which possession is implied. The article itself does not involve possession, but this notion can be inferred from the presence of the article alone in certain contexts.
 Ephesians 5:25 οι ανδρες αγαπατε **τας** γυναικας
 Husbands, love **your** wives.

## With Substantives (Dependent or Modifying Use)
[Wallace classifies all of the following categories except the last as subcategories of the "individualizing article."] The individualizing article particularizes, distinguishing otherwise similar objects; the generic (or categorical) article is used to distinguish one category of individuals from another.

### Simple Identification
The article is frequently used to distinguish one individual from another.

 Luke 4:20 και πτυξας το βιβλιον αποδους **τω** υπηρετη εκαθισεν
 He closed the book and gave it back to **the** attendant and sat down

### Anaphoric (Previous Reference)
The anaphoric article is the article denoting previous reference. The first mention of the substantive is usually anarthrous because it is merely being introduced. But subsequent mentions of it use the article, for the article is now pointing back to the substantive previously mentioned.

 John 4:40,43 emeinen ekei duo hmeraV...meta de taV duo hmeraV
 He stayed there two days ... after the two days ...

 2 Timothy 4:2 khruxon ton logon
 Preach the word! (see 2 Timothy 3:16)

### Deitic ("Pointing" Article)
The article is occasionally used to point out an object or person which/who is present at the moment of speaking. It typically has a demonstrative force.
 
 Matthew 14:15 proshlqon autw oi maqhtai autou legonteV erhmoV estin o topoV
 The disciples came to him, saying, "This place is deserted."

### Par Excellence
The article is frequently used to point out a substantive that is, in a sense, "in a class by itself." It is the only one deserving of the name. For example, if in late January someone were to say to you, "Did you see the game?" you might reply, "Which game?" They might then reply, "*The* game! The only game worth watching! The BIG game! You know, the Super Bowl!" This is the article used in a *par excellence* way.

 John 1:21 o profhthV ei su
 Are you the prophet?

### Monadic ("One of a Kind" or "Unique" Article)
The article is frequently used to identify monadic or one-of-a-kind nouns, such as "*the* devil," "*the* sun," "*the* Christ."

 John 1:29 ide o amnoV tou qeou o airwn thn amartian tou kosmou
 Look the lamb of God who takes away the sin of the world!

### Well-Known ("Celebrity" Article)
The article points out an object that is well known, but for reasons *other* than the above categories (i.e., not anaphoric, deitic, *par excellence*, or monadic). This it refers to a well-known object that has not been mentioned in the preceding context (anaphoric), nor is considered to be the best of its class (*par excellence*), nor is one of a kind (monadic).

 James 1:1 taiV dwdeka fulaiV taiV {{GW|EN}} th diaspora
 to the twelve tribes that are in the dispersion

### Abstract (the Article with Abstract Nouns)
Abstract nouns by their very nature focus on a quality. However, when such a noun is articular, that quality is "tightened up," as it were, defined more closely, distinguished from other notions.

 Matthew 7:23 oi ergazomenoi thn anomian
 the workers of lawlessness

 John 4:22 h swthria ek twn ioudaiwn estin
 Salvation is from the Jews

### Generic (Categorical) Article
:***as a class***
While the *individualizing* article distinguishes or identifies a particular object belonging to a larger class, the generic article distinguishes one class from another. This is somewhat less frequent than the individualizing article (though it still occurs hundreds of times in the NT). It categorizes rather than particularizes.

 Matthew 18:17 estw soi wsper o eqnikoV kai o telwnhV
 Let him be to you as the Gentiles and the tax-collector.

## As a Substantiver
The article can turn almost any part of speech into a noun: adverbs, adjectives, prepositional phrases, particles, infinitives, participles, and even finite verbs. As well, the article can turn a phrase into a nominal entity. This incredible flexibility is part of the genius of the Greek article.

 Matthew 8:28 elqonti autw eiV to peran
 when he came to the other side

 Matthew 5:5 makarioi oi praeiV oti autoi klhronomhsousin thn ghn
 Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth

 Luke 7:19 su ei o ercomenoV
 Are you the one who is to come?

 Mark 10:40 to de kaqisai ek dexiwn mou kai ex euwnumwn mou ouk estin emon dounai
 but to sit at my right hand or my left is not mine to give

 Matthew 10:3 iakwboV o tou alfaiou
 James, the [son] of Alphaeus

 Acts 11:2 oi ek peritomhV
 those of the circumcision [party]

 1 Corinthians 14:16 pwV erei to amhn
 How will he say the "Amen"?

## As a Function Marker
When the article is used as a grammatical function marker, it may or may not also bear a semantic force. But even when it does bear such a force, the grammatical (structural) use is usually prominent.

### To Denote Adjectival Positions
Especially when the article is used to denote the second attributive position would we say that it has almost not semantic meaning.

 Mark 8:38 elqh {{GW|EN}} th doxh tou patroV autou meta twn aggelwn twn agiwn
 whenever he comes in his Father's glory with the holy angels.

### With Possessive Pronouns
Almost invariably the article is used when a possessive pronoun is attached to the noun.

 Mark 1:41 σπλαγχνισθεὶς ἐκτείνας τὴν χεῖρα αὐτοῦ
 stretching out his hand

### In Genitive Phrases
In genitive phrases both the head noun and the genitive noun normally have or lack the article ("Apollonius' canon").

 Mark 1:15 ἤγγικεν ἡ βασιλεία τοῦ Θεοῦ
 The kingdom of God is near.

### With Indeclinable Nouns
The article is used with indeclinable nouns to show the case of the noun.

 Luke 1:68 euloghtoV kurioV o qeoV tou israhl
 Blessed is the Lord God of Israel.

### With Participles
The article before the participles functions both as a substantiver and as a function marker. The presence of the article indicates a substatival (or adjectival) function for the participle. Of course, the participle can also often be substantival or adjectival without the article, though there is the greater possibility of ambiguity in such instances.

 Luke 6:21 makarioi oi peinwnteV nun
 Blessed are those who weep now.

### With Demonstratives
The article is used with the demonstratives in predicate position to indicate attributive function.

 Matthew 16:18 epi tauth th petra oikodomhsw mou thn ekklhsian
 On this rock I will build my church.

### With Nominative Nouns
Normally a subject will have the article (unless it is a pronoun or proper noun).

 Luke 11:7 h qura kekleistai
 The door is shut.

## To Distinguish Subject from Predicate Nominative
:***and Object from Complement***
Generally speaking, the subject will be distinguished from the predicate nominative by having the article.

 Matthew 12:8 kurioV gar estin kai tou sabbatou o uioV tou anqrwpou
 The Son of Man is lord of the Sabbath.

## Absence of the Article
It is not necessary for a noun to have the article in order for it to be definite. But conversely, a noun cannot be indefinite when it has the article. Thus it may be definite without the article, and it must be definite with the article. When a substantive is anarthrous, it may have one of three forces: indefinite, qualitative, or definite. 
### Indefinite
An indefinite noun refers to one member of a class, without specifying which member. For example, in John 4:7 we have "A woman from Samaria." The anarthrous ΓΥΝΗ is indefinite, telling us nothing about this particular woman.

### Qualitative
A qualitative noun places the stress on quality, nature, or essence. It does not merely indicate membership in a class of which there are other members (such as an indefinite noun), nor does it stress individual identity (such as a definite noun). It is akin to a generic noun in that it focuses on the kind. Further, like a generic, it emphasizes class traits. Yet, unlike generic nouns, a qualitative noun often has in view one individual rather than the class as a whole.

 1 John 4:8 ὁ Θεὸς ἀγάπη ἐστίν
 God is love

### Definite
A definite noun lays the stress on individual identity. It has in view membership in a class, but this particular member is already marked out by the author.

 Luke 5:8 Simwn PetroV prosepesen toiV gonasin Ihsou
 Simon Peter fell at the feet of Jesus.

## Special Uses and Non-Uses of the Article
1. Anarthrous Pre-Verbal Predicate Nominatives (Involving Colwell's Rule)
## Statement of the Rule: a definite nominative that precedes the verb is usually anarthrous.
## Clarification of the Rule: the converse is not true; anarthrous preverbal PNs are usually qualitative. ΘΕΟΣ in John 1:1c is probably qualitative (thus, not identifying the logos with the person of o theos, but stressing that their natures are the same: "What God was, the Word was" [NEB]).
1. The Article with Multiple Substantives Connected by Kai (Granville Sharp Rule and Related Constructions)
## Statement of the Granville Sharp Rule: both substantives (nouns, participles, adjectives) refer to the same person in the article-substantive-ΚΑΙ-substantive (TSKS) construction when:
##* both are personal
##* both are singular
##* both are non-proper (i.e., common terms, not proper names)
##: Example: Eph 1:3 o qeoV kai pathr
## Validity of the Rule Within the New Testament: always valid; Titus 2:13 & 2Pet 1:1 impacted. Exceptions outside the NT are capable of linguistic explanation and do not affect the Christologically significant texts.
## TSKS Constructions Involving Impersonal, Plural, and Proper Nouns
### Proper Names: always distinct individuals (e.g., "the Peter and James")
### Plural Personal Constructions: three different semantic groups possible: (1) distinct, (2) identical, (3) overlap (three subgroups). This breaks down:
###* participle + participle = identical
###* noun + noun = distinct or overlap (affects Eph 2:20; 4:11)
###* adjective + adjective = identical or overlap
###* mixed constructions: mixed semantic values
### Impersonal Constructions: three different semantic groups possible: (1) distinct, (2) identical, (3) overlap (three subgroups). All are represented, though #2 (identical) is rare. Affects Acts 2:23; 20:21; 2Thess 2:1; etc.

article
