---
language: Greek
pos: noun
strongs: 4484
gloss:
  - Rhegium
lexicon: [Ῥήγιον]
hebrew: רגיון
latin: Rhegium
gender: Neuter
---

{{PGHapax}}
1. Acts 28:13

After Cumae, Reggio is one of the oldest Greek colonies in southern Italy. The colony was settled by the inhabitants of Chalcis and Messenia in 720 BC on the site of the older settlement, Erythrà (Ερυθρά), meaning "the Red one". This dated back to the 3rd millennium BC and was established by the Ausones. The last Ausonian ruler was king Italus, from whom the name of Italy is derived.[4] King Iokastos is buried on the Punta Calamizzi promontory, called "Pallantiòn", where Greek settlers later arrived. The colony retained the earlier name of "Rhegion" (Ρήγιoν).
Reggio was one of the most important cities in Magna Grecia, reaching great economic and political power during the 5th and 6th centuries BC under the Anaxilas government. Anaxilas allowed Reggio to rule over all the Messina Strait, including Zancle (modern Messina). Later, the polis of Rhegion reached great artistic and cultural heights with its philosophic Pythagorean, sculpture and poetry schools from where leaders such as Pythagoras of Rhegium and Ibycus were educated. Rhegion later allied with Athens during the Peloponnesian War until 387 BC when the city was taken by the Syracusans. The Apostle, St. Paul passed through Rhegium in his final voyage to Rome (Acts XXVIII:13).
As an independent city Rhegium was an important ally and "socia navalis" of Rome. During the Imperial age it became one of the most important and flourishing cities of southern Italy when it was the seat of the "Corrector", the Governor of "Regio II Lucania et Bruttii" (province of Lucany and Brutium). It was devastated by several major earthquakes and associated tsunami during the Roman Empire when it was called "Rhegium Julium" and was a noble Roman city.
During the Byzantine Age Reggio became the capital of the "metropolis of the Byzantine possessions in southern Italy". It was later made the capital of the Duchy of Calabria and linchpin of the Greek church in Italy. During the 8th century the city became a Holy See.
{{Wikipedia}}
{{PAGENAME}}
